Update Case1, Case 2a and 2b (#11)
anne-glerum/aspect: cookbooks/kinematically_driven_subduction_2d/doc/kinematically_driven_subduction_2d.md

# Kinematically-driven 2d oceanic subduction

*This section was contributed by Anne Glerum and Yingying Li.*

This subduction example is based on the benchmark effort of Quinquis et al.,
of which initial results were published in {cite:t}`quinquis:2014`. In four 
increasingly complex cases we will go from isoviscous materials without any
temperature effects to a fully thermo-mechanical, nonlinear, strain-weakened
visco-plastic, externally-driven model of oceanic subduction. The setup is 
outlined in {numref}`fig:QQ_setup`. The models are run for 15 My

> and slab tip depth, trench location, RMS velocity and temperature, and viscous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and slab tip depth, trench location, root-mean-square (RMS) velocity and temperature, and viscous

```

dissipation are monitored. In addition, we discuss the effects of the element
size of the subduction interface and crustal layers, viscosity averaging and
the solver tolerance.

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_setup
<img src="setup_Quinquis2014.*" style="width:80.0%" />

 Case 4 model setup. Copied from {cite:t}`quinquis:2014`.
```

## Case 1: Simple rheology

The Case 1 model setup considers seven materials (compositional fields) apart
from the background sublithospheric mantle (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case1_setup`), including (1) the Bulk Oceanic Composition (BOC), (2) Serpentinized HarzBurgite 

> (SHB) and (3)"thermal" layer of the overiding plate, (4) the BOC, (5) SHB and (6) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(SHB) and (3) "thermal" layer of the overiding plate, (4) the BOC, (5) SHB and (6) 

```

 Case 1 diagnostic quantities of ASPECT
```

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_case1_results
<img src="Case1_visc.*" style="width:60.0%" />

 Case 1 viscosity snapshots at 8 and 15 My.
```
## Case 2a: Model with thermal evolution 

Case 2a builds on Case 1 by including a heterogeneous initial temperature field 
that combines the plate cooling model for the temperature in the plates with an 
adiabatic temperature gradient below the plates. For the plate cooling model, 
we assume that the overriding plate is 40 My old and the subducting plate 70 My. 
The temperature function is too complex to comfortably write out as a function
expression in the input file, so it is put in a new initial temperature plugin
called ’subduction plate cooling’. This plugin needs to be compiled as a shared
library that can be called from the input file:

```{literalinclude} Case2a_temperatures.prm

```
The initial temperature distribution can be seen in  {numref}`fig:QQ_case2a_temperature_t0`

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_case2a_temperature_t0
<img src="Case2a_temp_t0.*" />

 Case 2a temperature distribution at time 0
```

The thermal expansivity is kept zero in Case 2a. Therefore the thermal evolution is 

> not coupled to the mechanical evolution. A high conductivity (k = 183.33 Wm-1K-1) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not coupled to the mechanical evolution. A high conductivity (k = 183.33 Wm<sup>-1</sup>K<sup>-1</sup>) 
```

Reviewer: This gives a superscript in Markdown

is defined for the upper mantle to enforce the mantle adiabat in the slow convection
system.

```{literalinclude} Case2a_materialmodel.prm

```

We can monitor the temperature evolution, however, by tracking the
root-mean-square (RMS) temperature and the isotherm depth using 
two plugins called "composition_trms_statistics" and "isotherm depth".

> To this end, we add the postprocessors ’temperature statistics’ 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To this end, we add the postprocessors ’composition RMS temperature statistics’ 

```

and "isotherm depth" to the prm file. The RMS temperature is tracked 
over the subducting plate (comprising BOC_SP, SHB_SP, thermal_SP) 
and the whole domain over time. And the isotherm temperature to be 
tracked is prescribed as 800 C.

```{literalinclude} Case2a_postprocessing.prm

```

{numref}`fig:QQ_case2a_diagnostics` shows the RMS temperature, 
800 C isotherm depth as well as the other diagnostics. The 800 C isotherm 

> keeps going deeper, while in the end the descend speed becomes slower. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depth continuously increases over time, but towards the end at a slower rate. 

```

The RMS temperature of the whole domain keeps decreasing due to the 
input of cold subducting plate into model domain. The slab RMS temperature 

> cools at the initial stage, then it goes up due to being warmed up by the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decreases at the initial stage, then it goes up due to the slab being warmed up by the 

```

> mantle. Notice that these other diagnostics are indeed the same as for Case 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mantle. Notice that the other diagnostics are indeed the same as for Case 1.

```

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_case2a_diagnostics
<img src="Case2a_diagnostics.*" />

 ASPECT Case 2a and case 1, Elefant case 2a diagnostic quantities
```

## Case 2b: Model with a temperature-dependent density

> Case2b builds on case 2a.  Compared to Case2a, the thermal expansivity in Case 2b

Reviewer: Please pick one way of writing out the Case names: i.e. Case2b, or Case 2b or case 2b.

> is set to 2.5e-5 K<sup>-1</sup> instead of 0. Therefore, temperature feeds into density 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is set to 2.5e-5 K<sup>-1</sup> instead of 0. Therefore, temperature feeds into the density 

```

> and therefore stokes equations. In addition, the benchmark uses different reference temperatures for each composition, but only one value of reference temperature is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and therefore into the Stokes equations. In addition, the benchmark uses different reference temperatures for each composition, but only one value can be specified for the reference temperature  

```

> allowed to be given to various compositional fields in ASPECT. Therefore, we adapted reference densities for different compositional fields. All the other parameters are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in ASPECT. Therefore, we adapted the reference densities for the different compositional fields to reflect the different reference temperatures. All the other parameters are 

```

> identical with case2a:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identical to case2a:

```

```{literalinclude} kinematically_driven_subduction_2d_case2b.prm

```
The density evolution can be seen in {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_density_evolution`. When the slab warms up, the density contrast between the slab and the mantle decreases.

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_case2b_density_evolution
<img src="Case2b_density_evolution.*" />
 Case2b density evolution
```

> Therefore, the  subduction in this case is much slower than that in case1 and 2b (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_diagnostics`). The subducting plate did not reach 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the  subduction in this case is much slower than that in case1 and 2b (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_diagnostics`). The subducting plate does not reach 

```

> the bottom till 15 Myr, i.e., the third stage in case 1 and 2b is missing in this 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bottom in 15 Myr, i.e., the third stage of case 1 and 2b is missing in this 

```

case. 

```{figure-md} fig:QQ_case2b_diagnostics
<img src="Case2b_diagnostics.*" />

 ASPECT Case2b diagnostic quantities
```

> The root mean square velocity over the whole domain increases (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_diagnostics`) .This is due to higher velocities in the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RMS velocity over the whole domain continuously increases (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_diagnostics`). This is due to higher sub-lithospheric velocities on the 

```

Reviewer: Do you mean to explain here why the RMS velocity is higher than in the previous cases? Or just that it keeps increasing because the third phase is not reached yet? Please clarify in the text.

> mantle in the left side of the mantle where a second convection cell forms (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_velocity_evolution`) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
left side of the domain where a second convection cell forms (see {numref}`fig:QQ_case2b_velocity_evolution`) 

```
